README.md, before:

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
[![All Contributors](https://img.shields.io/badge/all_contributors-1-orange.svg?style=flat-square)](#contributors-)
<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:END -->

# Introduction
devlab is a way to quickly set up development environments for various languages. On default, it contains a mode in which Jupyter starts with the said language enabled, but, it also offers a way to use it as a terminal for advanced usage / complete development environment.

This project contains the Docker files for building devlab and all the associated scripts (both for Linux and for Powershell).

# Installing devlab
The easiest way to get devlab on your PC is by using the install-scripts:

Linux / WSL:
```
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/onspot-tools/devlab/master/scripts/install.sh | sh`
```

Powershell:
```
iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/onspot-tools/devlab/master/scripts/install.ps1'))
```    

Either of these will create a directory called `devlab` where you invoked them, and will also pull in the devlab start-scripts (also called as devlab (Linux) / devlab.ps (powershell) into that directory.

To use devlab, get into that directory and start devlab. In the explanation that follows, we use only `devlab`, but everything also holds good for `devlab.ps1` too - for those who use docker-for-desktop and powershell.

# devlab script
The devlab script is the starting point for using devlab, and has the following usage:

    devlab [-l <lang>] [-v <version>] [notmux | jupyter | stop]

where:
-l <lang> - Use devlab for a specific language. Default: devlab comes up with Python and JUlia.
-v <version> - Use devlab for a specific version of a language. Default: latest version

The other commands are explained below.
## Starting devlab
The devlab can be started with any of the following options:

    ./devlab

This simply starts devlab as a terminal, with `tmux` configured for showing two vertical panes.

    ./devlab notmux

Similar to the above, but does not start a tmux.

    ./devlab jupyter

Starts devlab in a daemon mode, which serves Jupyter Lab. It is now possible to use devab in two ways:

- Use a browser, navigate to the location shown by the command above, to use it as a Jupyter notebook
- Shell into devlab to use it as a normal terminal. `./shell` helps to shell into a running devlab.

## Stopping devlab
Use this command to stop devlab:

    ./devlab stop

# Using devlab
After starting devlab, it can be used both as a terminal or a jupyter notebook as explained above. Inside the devlab, you will be seeing two directories: `bin` and `work` (there might be more depending on what version of devlab you are using). `bin` contains a command `starttmux` start starts a pre-configured tmux for you - if you require. Note that starting devlab without any option automatically starts `tmux` for you too, unless you have specifically used `notmux` command not to start tmux.

The work directory is for keeping your working files. These files are preserved even after you stop devlab - they will be in the "work" directory in the same directory where you started devlab from.

devlab creates docker named-volumes to preserve your files. The name of the volume follows a standard: 

    devlab-<lang>-<version>

The base devlab volume is named as devlab-base-<version>

If you would want to start afresh, just remove the relevant colume and then restart devlab:

    docker volume rm devlab-<lang>-<version>

If you would like to copy the files from the volumes into your host machine, or want to use the files from the volumes from other containers, just mount the volume where you want and use that - independant of devlab.

## Adding Python packages
More python packages can be installed simply by using:

    `pip install <package>`

## Normal user and root user
devlab is designed in such a way that you will be using it as a user `dev` with normal privileges. However:

- `zypper install <package>` installs OpenSUSE packages as root, automatically
- `rs` brings a root-shell for you

**Use both of these with care**, as you can really damage your system with these.

## Using devlab behind a proxy
Use of devlab behind a proxy server is a fully supported scenario. Proxy supporting only NTLM authentication is also possible, but only with a NTLM proxy helper like [px](https://github.com/genotrance/px), [cntlm](http://cntlm.sourceforge.net/) or [ntlmaps](http://ntlmaps.sourceforge.net/).

To use devlabs behind a proxy, before starting devlabs (via the devlab command explained above), make sure to define http_proxy and the https_proxy environment variables. That's it! Devlabs can now be used without any problems. Except when...

If your corporate proxy is an MITM proxy, it is likely that your IT team provides you the "trusted certificates" that are installed in all PCs that go through this proxy. For using devlabs behind such a proxy, in addition to the environment variables mentioned above, you need to create a directory called `trustedcerts` in the same level as your devlab script, and drop all your trusted certificates (in PEM-encoded form) in this directory. Devlab automatically mounts this directory into the container and uses the certificates you've dropped in that directory to connect to the external world.

Some language features (such as installing new packages / libraries for your language) need this external connection to work - and the combination of the environment variables and the `trustedcerts` directory will help in this connection behind your proxies.

# Contributing to devlab
Well, anybody is welcome to contributing to this project, and [All Contributors]() are recognised for their contribution! [Check out here](CONTRIBUTING.md) to know how you can contribute to making devlab the best place for developers to quickly get on to a development laboratory.

# Contributors ✨

Thanks goes to these wonderful people ([emoji key](https://allcontributors.org/docs/en/emoji-key)):

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://blog.ramdoot.in/"><img src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1006084?v=4?s=100" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Arvind Devarajan</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/commits?author=arvindd" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/commits?author=arvindd" title="Documentation">📖</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/pulls?q=is%3Apr+reviewed-by%3Aarvindd" title="Reviewed Pull Requests">👀</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/issues?q=author%3Aarvindd" title="Bug reports">🐛</a> <a href="#example-arvindd" title="Examples">💡</a> <a href="#ideas-arvindd" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a> <a href="#infra-arvindd" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="#maintenance-arvindd" title="Maintenance">🚧</a> <a href="#question-arvindd" title="Answering Questions">💬</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:END -->

This project follows the [all-contributors](https://github.com/all-contributors/all-contributors) specification. Contributions of any kind welcome!

Commit message:

Added Jupyter notebook.
Also, revamped the devlab scripts to include notebook options.

README.md, after:

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
[![All Contributors](https://img.shields.io/badge/all_contributors-1-orange.svg?style=flat-square)](#contributors-)
<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-BADGE:END -->

# Introduction
devlab is a way to quickly set up development environments for various languages. On default, it contains a mode in which Jupyter starts with the said language enabled, but, it also offers a way to use it as a terminal for advanced usage / complete development environment.

This project contains the Docker files for building devlab and all the associated scripts (both for Linux and for Powershell).

# Installing devlab
The easiest way to get devlab on your PC is by using the install-scripts:

Linux / WSL:
```
curl -sSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/onspot-tools/devlab/master/scripts/install.sh | sh`
```

Powershell:
```
iex ((New-Object System.Net.WebClient).DownloadString('https://raw.githubusercontent.com/onspot-tools/devlab/master/scripts/install.ps1'))
```    

Either of these will create a directory called `devlab` where you invoked them, and will also pull in the devlab start-scripts (also called as devlab (Linux) / devlab.ps (powershell) into that directory.

To use devlab, get into that directory and start devlab. In the explanation that follows, we use only `devlab`, but everything also holds good for `devlab.ps1` too - for those who use docker-for-desktop and powershell.

# devlab script
The devlab script is the starting point for using devlab, and has the following usage:

    devlab [-l <lang>] [-v <version>] [notmux | jupyter | stop]

where:
-l <lang> - Use devlab for a specific language. Default: devlab comes up with Python and JUlia.
-v <version> - Use devlab for a specific version of a language. Default: latest version

The other commands are explained below.
## Starting devlab
The devlab can be started with any of the following options:

    ./devlab

This simply starts devlab as a terminal, with `tmux` configured for showing two vertical panes.

    ./devlab notmux

Similar to the above, but does not start a tmux.

    ./devlab lab

Starts devlab in a daemon mode, which serves Jupyter Lab. It is now possible to use devab in two ways:

- Use a browser, navigate to the location shown by the command above, to use it as a Jupyter notebook
- Shell into devlab to use it as a normal terminal. `./shell` helps to shell into a running devlab.

<!-- -->
    ./devlab nb

OR

    ./devlab notebook

Starts devlab in a daemon mode, which serves Jupyter notebook. This is particularly useful for using features not yet available in the jupyter lab - eg: extensions such as RISE, for running live-code in slide-mode. Similar to the "lab" mode above, this can also be used as a shell by using `shell`.

## Stopping devlab
Use this command to stop devlab:

    ./devlab stop

# Using devlab
After starting devlab, it can be used both as a terminal or a jupyter notebook as explained above. Inside the devlab, you will be seeing two directories: `bin` and `work` (there might be more depending on what version of devlab you are using). `bin` contains a command `starttmux` start starts a pre-configured tmux for you - if you require. Note that starting devlab without any option automatically starts `tmux` for you too, unless you have specifically used `notmux` command not to start tmux.

The work directory is for keeping your working files. These files are preserved even after you stop devlab - they will be in the "work" directory in the same directory where you started devlab from.

devlab creates docker named-volumes to preserve your files. The name of the volume follows a standard: 

    devlab-<lang>-<version>

The base devlab volume is named as devlab-base-<version>

If you would want to start afresh, just remove the relevant colume and then restart devlab:

    docker volume rm devlab-<lang>-<version>

If you would like to copy the files from the volumes into your host machine, or want to use the files from the volumes from other containers, just mount the volume where you want and use that - independant of devlab.

## Adding Python packages
More python packages can be installed simply by using:

    `pip install <package>`

## Normal user and root user
devlab is designed in such a way that you will be using it as a user `dev` with normal privileges. However:

- `zypper install <package>` installs OpenSUSE packages as root, automatically
- `rs` brings a root-shell for you

**Use both of these with care**, as you can really damage your system with these.

## Using devlab behind a proxy
Use of devlab behind a proxy server is a fully supported scenario. Proxy supporting only NTLM authentication is also possible, but only with a NTLM proxy helper like [px](https://github.com/genotrance/px), [cntlm](http://cntlm.sourceforge.net/) or [ntlmaps](http://ntlmaps.sourceforge.net/).

To use devlabs behind a proxy, before starting devlabs (via the devlab command explained above), make sure to define http_proxy and the https_proxy environment variables. That's it! Devlabs can now be used without any problems. Except when...

If your corporate proxy is an MITM proxy, it is likely that your IT team provides you the "trusted certificates" that are installed in all PCs that go through this proxy. For using devlabs behind such a proxy, in addition to the environment variables mentioned above, you need to create a directory called `trustedcerts` in the same level as your devlab script, and drop all your trusted certificates (in PEM-encoded form) in this directory. Devlab automatically mounts this directory into the container and uses the certificates you've dropped in that directory to connect to the external world.

Some language features (such as installing new packages / libraries for your language) need this external connection to work - and the combination of the environment variables and the `trustedcerts` directory will help in this connection behind your proxies.

## Running devlab on a port different from 9000
devlab runs on TCP port 9000 by default. If you want to change this, you need to edit the `devlab` script (in Linux / Unix, on Windows, this is the `devlap.ps1`). Search for the variable HPORT, and change that to what you would like devlab to run on.
# Contributing to devlab
Well, anybody is welcome to contributing to this project, and [All Contributors]() are recognised for their contribution! [Check out here](CONTRIBUTING.md) to know how you can contribute to making devlab the best place for developers to quickly get on to a development laboratory.

# Contributors ✨

Thanks goes to these wonderful people ([emoji key](https://allcontributors.org/docs/en/emoji-key)):

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:START - Do not remove or modify this section -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->
<table>
  <tr>
    <td align="center"><a href="https://blog.ramdoot.in/"><img src="https://avatars.githubusercontent.com/u/1006084?v=4?s=100" width="100px;" alt=""/><br /><sub><b>Arvind Devarajan</b></sub></a><br /><a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/commits?author=arvindd" title="Code">💻</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/commits?author=arvindd" title="Documentation">📖</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/pulls?q=is%3Apr+reviewed-by%3Aarvindd" title="Reviewed Pull Requests">👀</a> <a href="https://github.com/onspot-tools/devlab/issues?q=author%3Aarvindd" title="Bug reports">🐛</a> <a href="#example-arvindd" title="Examples">💡</a> <a href="#ideas-arvindd" title="Ideas, Planning, & Feedback">🤔</a> <a href="#infra-arvindd" title="Infrastructure (Hosting, Build-Tools, etc)">🚇</a> <a href="#maintenance-arvindd" title="Maintenance">🚧</a> <a href="#question-arvindd" title="Answering Questions">💬</a></td>
  </tr>
</table>

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->

<!-- ALL-CONTRIBUTORS-LIST:END -->

This project follows the [all-contributors](https://github.com/all-contributors/all-contributors) specification. Contributions of any kind welcome!
